Making streams is fine and good, and
we've done some stuff with those streams.
We have manipulated the DOM,
predominantly, we've occasionally logged
to the console but as these events come
through the ability to do stuff with them.
I think where we start to
find the power of ArcGIS.
So, really when we talk about operators,
we gonna talk about this as
effectively a story in three parts.
Part one,we just gonna talk about some
of the basic data manipulation operator,
right.
These are not dissimilar from what you
might be familiar with like in lodash or
even on the Array prototype.
Harkens back to the very beginning of
this when I said what I quoted from
the ArcGIS documentation that
RX js is like lodash for events.
Well, yeah, that also means that
like some of the methods like
lodash has are common for ArcGIS as well.
We'll start with these, a lot of them
like will seem somewhat familiar or
at least intuitive.
But what I want you to pay attention
to as we go through is the syntax.
The syntax could be slightly different
than when you might be used to on array,
you can kind of chain
the methods as you go through.
The concept is the same, but the syntax
is going to look slightly different.
And for a very good reason they'll
kinda explain along the way.
So we will kind of start with this
kind of Fibonacci sequence right here.
Right now this one as we kind of like
the question we had earlier was like
this one will go on forever.
So if you were to just subscribe to this
you would lock up the main thread and
bad things would happen, right?
But so you would have to do something
like this you'd have to say like, cool.
I want a Fibonacci sequence of a certain
number of iterations and then stop, right?
But again, the promise of like RX js
is that we can take these streams and
we can choose as the consumer, when we
want to start and when we want to stop.
Right, we don't need the interval at
the time is defined to know when to stop
counting.
We'll stop counting when we
say we're gonna stop counting.
We kind of like take that control
in our own hands at this point.
So every observable on top of everything
else has this thing called a pipe method.
And a pipe method takes one or
more operators right, and
those operators kind of run
through one after the other.
And each one will manipulate
the values that come through and
pass it along to the next one.
So similar to method chaining,
also similar to usually the pipe or
chain in lodash in a lot of like
functional programming libraries.
There is some version of this where
you can kind of just pick a value and
keep moving it along the way,
manipulating it over time.
Where RxJS gets interesting with this
is not only can you double a number,
which is what we're gonna start with and
stuff along those lines.
But you could also say like, cool,
I wanna space these out over time.
Or I want to only take every nth value,
or if they're slam the rage
clicking on that button wait until
they chill out a little bit.
And then we'll go respond with requests in
a reasonable fashion before
we slam our own API, right?
And all of those kinds of things giving us
the ability to kind of control the flow.
So we'll start with some of
the basic kind of just operators for
manipulating the data.
Eventually we are going to move into some
of the ones where we kind of manipulate
time a little bit and have rules based
on kind of the time space continuum or
what we want to do.
And finally, we'll look at some of
the ones that allow us to kind of take
multiple streams and kind of to combine
and control them as we go along.
So, we'll start to play around
with this in a second, but
if we look we have this one called take,
right?
And take is, take will solve that initial
problem that we had earlier, right?
Where we had an infinite generator that
was gonna spit out values forever, right?
It can still be its infinite self.
We're just basically saying,
I'm gonna take ten values from you.
I'm gonna unsubscribe, right?
After that we're done here I'm going home,
right?
And so you can now you don't have to have
all that logic in the generator itself.
But you can have it in whatever is
consuming it can choose how many
values it wants and you kind of begin
to manipulate so on and so forth.
Cool the other one its friend is skipped.
Skip will skip the first number of
values this one is dangerous or
Fibonacci sequence because it is
infinite so you gotta be careful.
We have other ones like take while and
skip while which will very much act like
a filter factor Function
where they'll go through.
And they will take all the values up
until you hit 200 or skip for a while and
then take four so
we don't have the infinite problem.
And you can see we can chain them.
Where it becomes a little bit different is
and we'll look at pop quiz a second, but
I want to like the slides
a little bit bigger.
So when I look at the syntax here,
is instead of method chaining, right.
You kind of pass them all in as
individual functions, right.
And even if it doesn't take any arguments,
you still call it as a function.
That's mostly to keep the syntax and
the kind of API contract the same.
The reason for
this is by breaking all the operators out
into their own functions then you can
import one at a time you can use tree
shaking in your bundling tools right.
>> Is this is pipe then and arcs function
it will take in repertory many does
that or is it one of those
weird like FP functions.
Cuz it has like a definition for
one input and 2 and 3, and 4,
where you max out eventually.
>> I haven't looked at the types
to see where this ends,
like the JavaScript
implementation of itself,
the JavaScript implementation of it,
like well allow for an arguments whether.
If anyone's who's tried to like type
a function that takes an unknown amount
of arguments as saying that the types are
usually just more and more types, right?
And if you're using this with TypeScript,
each one if you return a different
value the next one has to be
able to receive it right.
So like you start out with that initial
value in this case from the Fibonacci
sequence it would be a number right
if you map it into a string and
then you try to do a number thing with it.
Type script will get very angry with you
and type script will assume when you
subscribe, you're getting whatever
the last thing outta that pipe was.
But the actual type definition,
my gut says I've looked at L Dash's,
where it is simply.
Here's a type with one argument.
Here's two, here's three, here's four.
>> I just looked and
it goes from one to nine.
So you can put up to nine.
>> You can put up to nine before
TypeScript gives up on you but
the JavaScript implementation you
should be able to have effectively
an infinite number.
I think the only color I'll add to that
question is nine in a row like past that,
like just probably recently
stopped at nine, right?
That's to say you won't have things where
you then you have child observables so
on and so forth.
But like after nine, you can probably you
can also break stuff out into functions
you have lots of options.
All right, so a pop quiz.
This will never admit It.
Does anyone know why?
>> There's no consumer, it's
>> It's got console all consuming it
costs a lot of data right down there.
Effectively, in this case,
we will skip value.
>> We're not mapping then,
we're not materializing any of the values,
we're just filtering them.
>> We're filtering into a situation
when nothing makes it out alive.
>> Yeah.
>> Right?
We're skipping values that are under 100
and we're only taking values, but because
it's a pipe you like both of those things
like there are numbers between 101 and
499, right?
>> But only they basically nothing will
make it out into the next one right so
you have to be very careful that your
pipe every value pass the next and
without a set of rules and
all run in parallel.
It's each stage only lets a certain
number of values through.
>> Cool.
All right, there are over 100 operators.
Some of them are deprecated, some of
them are just variations on the theme,
we're not going to talk
about all 100 of them.
>> We're gonna talk a little bit
of some of the common ones and
some of them I will just sprinkle
in as we are building things right.
But we can kind of see some of
them as we kind of go through so
we've got that filter, filter does
exactly what it does with arrays.
It filters them based on the function.
So in this case only even
numbers will be allowed through.
Map who doesn't love a good map?
Possibly midway through this workshop,
you'll hate map for
reasons that we will talk about later.
Some people who have a little
experience of smiling and nodding,
the rest of you will will arrive
at that station together.
Map will go through the values and
do some transformation to them.
This works great for regular values.
I will just kind of give a little bit of
a spoiler it becomes problematic when I
heard you like observables, so
I put observables in your observables.
And that's where we're gonna have
to deal with some of that, but
we're not totally there yet.
It's got a little cousin called Map To,
which just maps it to a value.
Map To basically as effectively
if you took whatever
value wasn't returned the same
string no matter what mapped it.
Cool.
Reduce is well, there's two that
are kind of similar, right?
Reduce and scan.
I want to point out the difference between
the two of them we'll look at scan next.
Reduce will basically be like
an array reduce very much so
where you will only get the final
value when it's all done, right.
So it works through all the numbers
in this case it's totaling them up.
It will add them all in place and
then give you the final value.
Scan, scan will actually give you every
time it runs that reduce function,
it will emit the value and
pass it through.
Right so if you want every kind of piece
as you go through every value is omitted
you'll get it all on the way reduce
will only give you the final result.
So the reason that I point this out
is scan is usually what you want but
your brain a lot of times because
of arrays we'll think about reduce.
So I'm like stopping for a minute and
pausing to be like now you probably
want scan even if you're
thinking reduce in this case.
Scan can theoretically you
can take an infinite range.
You can scan through it, but
then you take four, so on and so forth.
One final one,
which is everyone's best friend is tap.
We said before the pipe, one value to
the next value, so on and so forth.
Right tap allows you to kind of
have a side effect for a second and
return the same value you received,
why is this useful?
Because if you don't have tap here's
what you're gonna do, you're gonna,
map where you console log the value and
then return the same value again.
You don't need to live like that,
you can just use tap and
you can console log the value.
It's also useful for side effects that
you want to do because again, you will or
subscribe will only get that
final thing that comes out.
It will not get any of
the intermediary values, right?
Yeah.
>> Am I understanding correctly that top
is essentially a convenience function
where it takes in value operates on it and
returns that same value.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, okay.
>> Exactly,
it's like I wanna do other stuff,
but I don't actually wanna change this
value in any way, shape, or form.
Keep it going through.
I just want to, again, console logging
alone is worth taps, weight, and
gold even though it's code and
doesn't have a weight and gold.
But yeah tab is useful for, want to do
something a side effect of some sorts.
Great because this pipe is in
functional programming like it's a pure
set of pure functions tab allows
you to have a side effect.
That could be console logging.
It could be manipulating the DOM.
It could be anything, anything all you
need to do that's not gonna be the final
value can happen in a tap.